README.md, before:

<!-- Improved compatibility of back to top link: See: https://gitlab.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/pull/73 -->
<a id="readme-top"></a>
<!--
*** Thanks for checking out the Best-README-Template. If you have a suggestion
*** that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request
*** or simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
*** Don't forget to give the project a star!
*** Thanks again! Now go create something AMAZING! :D
-->



<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![Contributors][contributors-shield]][contributors-url]
[![Forks][forks-shield]][forks-url]
[![Stargazers][stars-shield]][stars-url]
[![Issues][issues-shield]][issues-url]
[![MIT License][license-shield]][license-url]


<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->
<br />
<div align="center">
<h3 align="center">IIO-Niri</h3>

  <p align="center">
  Listen to iio-sensor-proxy and updates Niri output orientation depending on the accelerometer orientation.
    <br />
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri?tab=readme-ov-file#usage"><strong>Explore the docs »</strong></a>
    <br />
    <br />
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug-report---.md">Report Bug</a>
    &middot;
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues/new?labels=enhancement&template=feature-request---.md">Request Feature</a>
  </p>
</div>


<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#about-the-project">About The Project</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#built-with">Built With</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#prerequisites">Prerequisites</a></li>
        <li><a href="#installation">Installation</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#usage">Usage</a></li>
    <li><a href="#roadmap">Roadmap</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contributing">Contributing</a></li>
    <li><a href="#license">License</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contact">Contact</a></li>
    <li><a href="#acknowledgments">Acknowledgments</a></li>
  </ol>
</details>



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## About The Project

Listen to IIO-Sensor-Proxy and updates Niri output orientation depending on the accelerometer orientation. 

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



### Built With

* [![Rust][Rust]][Rust-url]
* [![Nix][Nix]][Nix-url]

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

IIO-Niri requires the Rust Compiler if you plan to compile it, you will also need Cargo to build the project and DBus dependencies.
* `rustc` ⩾ 1.86.0
* `cargo` ⩾ 1.86.0
* `pkg-config` ⩾ 0.29.2
* `libdbus` ⩾ 1.6

At runtime, the program relies on [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] to fetch updates on the accelerometer. Make sure it is running alongside IIO-Niri.

If you intend to work with Nix:

* `nix` ⩾ 2.28.4 with [flake support](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Flake).

### Installation

#### From source

1. Clone the repo
   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.git
   ```
2. Install Cargo and Rustc from your package manager.
3. Build IIO-Niri with Cargo in release mode 
   ```sh
   cargo build --release
   ```
4. An executable for IIO-Niri will be available in `target/release/iio-niri`

#### With Nix

1. Import the project in your flake inputs
   ```nix
   inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:nixos/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    iio-niri = {
      url = "github:Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
   };
   ```
2. You can then install it from `inputs.iio-niri.packages.${system}.default` where `${system}` is your system descriptor. For Linux, usually `x86_64-linux`.


<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
## Usage

```
Usage: iio-niri [OPTIONS]

Options:
  -m, --monitor <MONITOR>          The monitor to rotate depending on the accelerometer orientation. Defaults to the first monitor Niri can see
  -t, --timeout <TIMEOUT>          The number of milliseconds before timeout for a dbus request [default: 5000]
  -n, --niri-socket <NIRI_SOCKET>  The path to the niri IPC socket. Can be omitted
  -h, --help                       Print help
  -V, --version                    Print version
```

At runtime, the program relies on [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] to fetch updates on the accelerometer. Make sure it is running alongside IIO-Niri.

Then start IIO-Niri with Niri:

```kdl
spawn-at-startup "iio-niri" "--monitor" "eDP-1"
```

### With NixOS

The provided flake offers a NixOS module to install IIO-Niri as well as an overlay.

Here is a simple example on how to install both the overlay and the module in
your NixOS configuration:

```nix
outputs = { self, nixpkgs, iio-niri }: {
  # replace 'joes-desktop' with your hostname here.
  nixosConfigurations.joes-desktop = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
    system = "x86_64-linux";
    modules = [
      iio-niri.nixosModules.default
      # ---Snip---
      # Add your own modules here
      # ---Snip---

      # Example to add the overlay to Nixpkgs:
      {
        nixpkgs = {
          overlays = [
            iio-niri.overlays.default
          ];
        };
      }
    ];
  };
};
```

Then enable the module.

```nix
{...}: {
  services.iio-niri = {
    enable = true;

    extraArgs = [
      "--monitor"
      "eDP-1"
    ];
  };
}
```

See [the module documentation][module-doc] for more info.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open source community such an amazing place to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
Don't forget to give the project a star! Thanks again!

### How to make a pull request

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add some amazing-feature'`)
  * Your commit messages must follow the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) specification.
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request on `develop`

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

### Top contributors:

<a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri" alt="contrib.rocks image" />
</a>


<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE.md` for more information.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Zhaith Izaliel - [@zhaith-izaliel.bsky.social](https://bsky.app/profile/zhaith-izaliel.bsky.social)

Project Link: [https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri](https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri)

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS -->
## Acknowledgments

* [Best-README-Template](https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template) for this README
* [IIO-Hyprland](https://github.com/JeanSchoeller/iio-hyprland) for the know how on handling DBus requests and signals for IIO-Sensor-Proxy
* [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] for the proxy to handle accelerometer requests for this program

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/blob/master/LICENSE.md

[Rust]: https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-B7400F?style=for-the-badge&logo=rust&logoColor=white
[Rust-url]: https://www.rust-lang.org/
[Nix]: https://img.shields.io/badge/nix-0B1120?style=for-the-badge&logo=nixos
[Nix-url]: https://nixos.org/

[IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/hadess/iio-sensor-proxy/
[module-doc]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/blob/master/module-doc.md

Commit message:

docs: add AUR install instructions to README

README.md, after:

<!-- Improved compatibility of back to top link: See: https://gitlab.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template/pull/73 -->
<a id="readme-top"></a>
<!--
*** Thanks for checking out the Best-README-Template. If you have a suggestion
*** that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request
*** or simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
*** Don't forget to give the project a star!
*** Thanks again! Now go create something AMAZING! :D
-->



<!-- PROJECT SHIELDS -->
<!--
*** I'm using markdown "reference style" links for readability.
*** Reference links are enclosed in brackets [ ] instead of parentheses ( ).
*** See the bottom of this document for the declaration of the reference variables
*** for contributors-url, forks-url, etc. This is an optional, concise syntax you may use.
*** https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links
-->
[![Contributors][contributors-shield]][contributors-url]
[![Forks][forks-shield]][forks-url]
[![Stargazers][stars-shield]][stars-url]
[![Issues][issues-shield]][issues-url]
[![MIT License][license-shield]][license-url]


<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->
<br />
<div align="center">
<h3 align="center">IIO-Niri</h3>

  <p align="center">
  Listen to iio-sensor-proxy and updates Niri output orientation depending on the accelerometer orientation.
    <br />
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri?tab=readme-ov-file#usage"><strong>Explore the docs »</strong></a>
    <br />
    <br />
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues/new?labels=bug&template=bug-report---.md">Report Bug</a>
    &middot;
    <a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues/new?labels=enhancement&template=feature-request---.md">Request Feature</a>
  </p>
</div>


<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#about-the-project">About The Project</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#built-with">Built With</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#getting-started">Getting Started</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#prerequisites">Prerequisites</a></li>
        <li><a href="#installation">Installation</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li><a href="#usage">Usage</a></li>
    <li><a href="#roadmap">Roadmap</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contributing">Contributing</a></li>
    <li><a href="#license">License</a></li>
    <li><a href="#contact">Contact</a></li>
    <li><a href="#acknowledgments">Acknowledgments</a></li>
  </ol>
</details>



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
## About The Project

Listen to IIO-Sensor-Proxy and updates Niri output orientation depending on the accelerometer orientation. 

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



### Built With

* [![Rust][Rust]][Rust-url]
* [![Nix][Nix]][Nix-url]

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

IIO-Niri requires the Rust Compiler if you plan to compile it, you will also need Cargo to build the project and DBus dependencies.
* `rustc` ⩾ 1.86.0
* `cargo` ⩾ 1.86.0
* `pkg-config` ⩾ 0.29.2
* `libdbus` ⩾ 1.6

At runtime, the program relies on [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] to fetch updates on the accelerometer. Make sure it is running alongside IIO-Niri.

If you intend to work with Nix:

* `nix` ⩾ 2.28.4 with [flake support](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Flake).

### Installation

#### From source

1. Clone the repo
   ```sh
   git clone https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.git
   ```
2. Install Cargo and Rustc from your package manager.
3. Build IIO-Niri with Cargo in release mode 
   ```sh
   cargo build --release
   ```
4. An executable for IIO-Niri will be available in `target/release/iio-niri`

#### With Nix

1. Import the project in your flake inputs
   ```nix
   inputs = {
    nixpkgs.url = "github:nixos/nixpkgs/nixos-25.05";
    iio-niri = {
      url = "github:Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri";
      inputs.nixpkgs.follows = "nixpkgs";
    };
   };
   ```
2. You can then install it from `inputs.iio-niri.packages.${system}.default` where `${system}` is your system descriptor. For Linux, usually `x86_64-linux`.

#### Arch Linux (AUR)

There are two primary ways to install iio-niri via the Arch User Repository (AUR):

##### Via Preferred AUR Helper (Yay or Paru)

1. Simply enter one of the two commands below, depending on your installed pacman wrapper:

```
  $ yay -S iio-niri
  
  $ paru -S iio-niri
```

##### Via makepkg (default)

2. Alternatively, simply clone the AUR repository and install using makepkg:

```
  git clone https://aur.archlinux.org/iio-niri.git
  cd iio-niri
  makepkg -si
```

**Please Note:** The AUR package for this project is maintained by the community, and not by the developer. While it is sourced directly from the master branch of the developer's GitHub repository, users should always exercise discretion and caution when installing packages via the AUR.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- USAGE EXAMPLES -->
## Usage

```
Usage: iio-niri [OPTIONS]

Options:
  -m, --monitor <MONITOR>          The monitor to rotate depending on the accelerometer orientation. Defaults to the first monitor Niri can see
  -t, --timeout <TIMEOUT>          The number of milliseconds before timeout for a dbus request [default: 5000]
  -n, --niri-socket <NIRI_SOCKET>  The path to the niri IPC socket. Can be omitted
  -h, --help                       Print help
  -V, --version                    Print version
```

At runtime, the program relies on [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] to fetch updates on the accelerometer. Make sure it is running alongside IIO-Niri.

Then start IIO-Niri with Niri:

```kdl
spawn-at-startup "iio-niri" "--monitor" "eDP-1"
```

### With NixOS

The provided flake offers a NixOS module to install IIO-Niri as well as an overlay.

Here is a simple example on how to install both the overlay and the module in
your NixOS configuration:

```nix
outputs = { self, nixpkgs, iio-niri }: {
  # replace 'joes-desktop' with your hostname here.
  nixosConfigurations.joes-desktop = nixpkgs.lib.nixosSystem {
    system = "x86_64-linux";
    modules = [
      iio-niri.nixosModules.default
      # ---Snip---
      # Add your own modules here
      # ---Snip---

      # Example to add the overlay to Nixpkgs:
      {
        nixpkgs = {
          overlays = [
            iio-niri.overlays.default
          ];
        };
      }
    ];
  };
};
```

Then enable the module.

```nix
{...}: {
  services.iio-niri = {
    enable = true;

    extraArgs = [
      "--monitor"
      "eDP-1"
    ];
  };
}
```

See [the module documentation][module-doc] for more info.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTRIBUTING -->
## Contributing

Contributions are what make the open source community such an amazing place to learn, inspire, and create. Any contributions you make are **greatly appreciated**.

If you have a suggestion that would make this better, please fork the repo and create a pull request. You can also simply open an issue with the tag "enhancement".
Don't forget to give the project a star! Thanks again!

### How to make a pull request

1. Fork the Project
2. Create your Feature Branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your Changes (`git commit -m 'feat: add some amazing-feature'`)
  * Your commit messages must follow the [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) specification.
4. Push to the Branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request on `develop`

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

### Top contributors:

<a href="https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri" alt="contrib.rocks image" />
</a>


<!-- LICENSE -->
## License

Distributed under the MIT License. See `LICENSE.md` for more information.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- CONTACT -->
## Contact

Zhaith Izaliel - [@zhaith-izaliel.bsky.social](https://bsky.app/profile/zhaith-izaliel.bsky.social)

Project Link: [https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri](https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri)

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- ACKNOWLEDGMENTS -->
## Acknowledgments

* [Best-README-Template](https://github.com/othneildrew/Best-README-Template) for this README
* [IIO-Hyprland](https://github.com/JeanSchoeller/iio-hyprland) for the know how on handling DBus requests and signals for IIO-Sensor-Proxy
* [IIO-Sensor-Proxy][IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url] for the proxy to handle accelerometer requests for this program

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>



<!-- MARKDOWN LINKS & IMAGES -->
<!-- https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/#reference-style-links -->
[contributors-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[contributors-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/graphs/contributors
[forks-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[forks-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/network/members
[stars-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[stars-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/stargazers
[issues-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[issues-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/issues
[license-shield]: https://img.shields.io/github/license/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri.svg?style=for-the-badge
[license-url]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/blob/master/LICENSE.md

[Rust]: https://img.shields.io/badge/Rust-B7400F?style=for-the-badge&logo=rust&logoColor=white
[Rust-url]: https://www.rust-lang.org/
[Nix]: https://img.shields.io/badge/nix-0B1120?style=for-the-badge&logo=nixos
[Nix-url]: https://nixos.org/

[IIO-Sensor-Proxy-Url]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/hadess/iio-sensor-proxy/
[module-doc]: https://github.com/Zhaith-Izaliel/iio-niri/blob/master/module-doc.md
